What is a Flip Flop?
A flip flop, otherwise known as a bi-stable gates, is a circuit that 
is used to store state information. It can be manipulated to be in one 
of two states until it receives an input signal called a trigger. When 
the trigger is received, the flip flop outputs the new state based on 
rules that satisfy a state change. We will be looking at three types of 
Flip Flops D, J-K and T flip-flop. 








D flip-flop

What is a D Flip-Flop?
A D flip-flop, D stands for data, tracks the input. It makes transitions 
which match those of the input D. This flip-flop stores the value that is 
on the data line. It can be thought of as a basic memory cell, it stores 
the value on the data line with the advantage of the output being synchronized 
to a clock. This flip-flop can only change output values when the clock is at 
a positive edge hence it is considered a positive edge-triggered flip flop. 






Other uses of D Flip-Flops?
D flip-flops form the basis of shift registers that are used in many electronic 
devices. Many logic synthesis tool use only D flip flop or D latch. D flip 
flops are also used in finite state machines. They can be made from a set/reset 
flip-flop by tying the set to the reset through an inverter. The results may be 
clocked.









Characteristic Table
Characteristics table define the behavior of the truth table. The following is 
the characteristics table for the D flip-flop, it has 3 columns. The first 
column is the value of D, a control input. The second column is the current 
state, that is the current value being output by Q. The third column is the 
next state, the value of Q at the next positive edge. It’s labelled with Q and 
the superscript, +. 








The D flip flop has two possible values. When D is 0, the 
flip flop does a reset, the output Q is set to 0. When D is 1, the flip flop 
does a set, the output Q is set to 1. 












J-K Flip Flop
As seen in the diagram, the J-K flip flop is made up of two 3-input AND Gates. 
The inputs are the J (set) and K (reset) inputs, the clock input and the 
feedback received from the Q and Q’ outputs.  Due to the structure of this flip 
flop, where both the inputs J and K are essentially interlocked, only one of the 
two inputs, J (set) or K (reset) can exhibit an effect on the circuit at once. 









When the circuit is set, the J input is inhibited by the “0” status of Q’ from 
through the lower NAND gate. If the circuit is reset, the K input is inhibited 
by the “0” status of Q through the upper NAND gate. The case where both J and K 
are 1, a set state inhibits inputs J so that the flip flop acts as if J = 0 while 
K = 1 when in fact both are actually 1. On the other hand, when the circuit 
receives the next trigger or pulse, the outputs will toggle from set to reset. 
Now, the reset state will inhibit the K input so that the flip flop functions 
as if J is 1 and K is 0 when both are actually 1.







Note: If both J and K inputs are HIGH, that satisfies the “toggle” where 
the current state is changed or “toggled” to the next state. If the J and K 
inputs are LOW then “no change” occurs.












T flip flop

The T flip-flop is also known as the toggle flip-flop, when the input T = 1 
the output will toggle or change on every clock edge. It can be used for binary
counters, frequency dividers and binary addition. It can be made from a J-K
flip-flop by tying both its inputs to high.

